Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher, interviewee Siobhán Grice, location of the interview
Swicker office and today's date is the 19th of October 2015. Before we start
Siobhán, would you be kind enough to spell your name in full?
Certainly. My name is Siobhán Grice, S-I-O-B-H-A-M-G-R-I-C-E.
Thank you very much indeed. How did you first make contact with Cardiff Carnival?
I was involved with a dance group that Sally ran. I just went along to the classes
and as it happened they were rehearsing for the 98th Carnival so I started off as a dance group.
So Sally McLennan was your gateway and she still is for many people to this very day.
She's the musical director, which involves dance as well obviously, for the Carnival crew.
So Sally dates right back in time. And in 1998 you were a dancer in the Carnival.
So can you remember what you were wearing perhaps? What kind of costume did you have?
I know we had big headdresses.
What a surprise.
Yes, and it was quite Egyptian type costumes and lots of blues and silvers.
I can see the costume in my mind. We have a picture of that which will be going into the archive.
So we can tell you that's what you were wearing.
I've got pictures of you going over Cotet's Bridge I think.
Oh right, yes.
That's where we have some really nice shots of you in costume and the rest of it, which is smashing.
And you'd have been dancing to samba drumming?
Yes, samba drumming.
So it was the first time that I'd ever done street dance and also the first time really that I've been involved in something that was dancing to that type of music.
So it was really quite exciting.
And it was a sunny day I think as I remember.
Yes, it was a sunny day.
So it was great fun.
Did you get involved in the making of the costumes as well or were you primarily about movement?
Yes, I did.
We were down in Cotet's.
In the community centre?
In the community centre and I vividly remember it.
We were making the costumes and I looked up and there was a rainbow over the camp.
So that was a really nice.
A good sign.
We weren't going to be flooded that year.
For those of you with biblical aspirations or connotations.
So after having danced with Sally in a dance group in 98, what happened next?
Well, 99 I came to the opening of the carnival of the launch party, which was the first time I'd been to the launch party.
And I went in and I spoke to you about possible work.
So I came and you had the welcoming committee.
I'm not sure of the job title.
So that's when I was involved on a work basis with the carnival.
Were you being a trainee at that point?
No, no, I was.
You were full time?
Yes, as the sort of front of house welcoming.
Got it.
So as people came in, I'd be.
That's a really important position because we're always trying to attract new people and having a welcoming face and a positive attitude, which you'd be glad to know you still possess, is really important.
So I can see you.
And in 99, were we at chapter?
I thought so.
Right here.
So we were in what used to be the gym and it's now called the studio.
And you're there.
I can see it now.
You're there as our.
I say receptionist, super receptionist.
Let's put it that way.
And it was it was a really nice job because it meant I got to meet everybody that was involved.
A lot of people had not, you know, had not done that.
Did you have to stop anybody escaping or whatever?
Let me out of there.
Everybody was really happy to be there and it was it was a lovely sort of creative environment.
And what I especially loved about it was that it was sort of a real fusion of the arts.
Like I come from an art background, visual art background, but with the camp, it was a mixture of the music, dance, art and performance.
And what really whatever people wanted to do, it was very open and very open for people to bring their own creativity there,
as well as following the sort of more structured.
I think we only had one secret rule, which was no Simpsons.
Yeah, it's like, you know, when there is an overarching theme, it's, you know, there's a black piece of paper.
But secretly, it'd be like, I can remember one year going like, OK, whatever we do, we mustn't produce Power Rangers.
It's like, no, it's just not it's just not us, you know.
And given that you are our hostess with the mostest, can you remember?
Did you get to play costume on the day itself this year?
I did, yes. Excellent. What were you in that design?
I was I had a blue costume.
I was I was part of the there was the blue people.
I'm not sure what the name of it was, but I did my own thing because I wasn't specifically with that group,
but I had blue paint all over my face and my body.
And I made a kind of blue leather sort of belt with lots of feathers on and a headdress.
Yeah. And and really out of a lot of the scraps of material.
So it was quite, it's not the case that the artists and the workers involved are well, they put themselves last.
So it's only until the last few days and suddenly goes like, whoops, you know, I may have helped facilitate hundreds of costumes.
And so it's like, what am I going to look like on the day?
Yeah, no, because because you're not specifically with the section, you know, you've got to go around all all the different groups.
Yes. Running up and down the line.
So just yeah, but those were my colors.
So that's why I wanted to be in that group.
And also it was the the drumming group were with them.
So it was people were dancing and I can't quite remember the name of them.
But it was I think it was an offshoot of run down mental.
That's it. Yeah.
Yes. So who's done it for a number of years and yes.
Yeah.
So would you have been holding?
I was holding something to me.
Oh, no, no, I wasn't.
Actually, I have my ones, my pink fairy ones because because I started off before I joined the carnival.
I just sort of got a performance piece up and running, which was pink fairy.
Does the pink fairy still exist?
She hasn't surfaced recently, but yes, she still exists.
Excellent. I can see the ones in my mind's eye.
And then the you had sort of like a mini feather boa wrapped around the right.
So it was kind of a cross between a sort of a blue warrior type costume with my pink meets the pink fairy.
Yes.
But I did go in as a pink fairy during one of the carnivals.
But I think that was for the Rugby World Cup when we were parades in the streets.
I think before before the game.
Yes, definitely.
And so that's when I you actually pink fairy did big time.
Yes.
So after after 1999, what happens next?
Tell us more about your carnival adventures.
Well, after 99, the carnival, my my I had a life changing experience because I met in the carnival,
which is a mix of, you know, Caribbean cultures.
It mixes. It is truly a intercultural experience.
I met the father of my children who's from St. Vincent.
Some of the the people running the carnival, some of the people making the costumes and working
alongside Swicker were there.
So I actually had my became a mother as a consequence of the carnival.
What does carnival mean to you?
Motherhood.
It's a good answer.
The way I see it is that really I was kind of a mother figure when I was meeting people in the carnival.
So it's sort of almost led into my role as a mother.
However, I did continue with the carnival and I brought my children along there.
Even there was one carnival when Rose, my daughter, was a couple of months old and I had her in my,
you know, my little papoose in during the carnival.
So I just integrated life.
I think that's the great thing about the carnival.
It is very much an all inclusive family event.
So it didn't disclude me because I was, which often happens when you're in the creative industries,
is that it's very much not family or child friendly.
So that was the great thing about it for me anyway.
So I could continue.
I didn't I didn't work in the carnival, but I always brought my children and they got involved in the culture of.
Literally carnival babies.
Yes, they were carnival babies.
Which is lovely, yes.
I think that's fantastic.
Could you say a little bit about, so obviously, yeah, carnival is something we share.
Perhaps a bit about your arts practice, because I associate you with lots of interesting, exciting and spiritual things.
That's right, yes.
For future generations.
In fact, as I was thinking of what the carnival meant to me,
I did think that there is a certain amount of spiritual elements of the carnival as well.
Because I felt that the whole drumming aspect of it is is is can draw parallels with with quite shamanic work
and especially the tradition of going through the streets and the night before the carnival.
The juve, the poor man's carnival.
Yes, well, I think that.
So if I say, you know me well, jab jab.
No, no, sorry, let's get it right.
I come from hell.
Jab jab.
You know me well.
I come from hell.
Jab jab.
Sorry, simple but effective.
And that tradition is to clear out any of the bad spirits the night before the carnival.
And so, like for me, I'm the work I do is quite I'm an artist.
I done my masters just before in 98.
I finished that.
So 99 being the first the year I joined or 98 this year, I joined the carnival.
I'm a painter is the practice I'm doing at the moment.
I use a studio at home.
Yes, I did last year.
And the light at Portcaul, the light.
Yes, it's the same night as the South Wales.
I'm making this up.
The light is very good.
Yeah, it is.
It is.
It's I was living in Cardiff at the time of the carnival, but I moved to Portcaul, which is my hometown.
And it's beautiful.
I sort of use that sort of, you know, the nature around as part of it to influence my work.
But I also do beach art and I go into the environment to create artworks, land art, beach art, land art,
go into schools, doing sort of willow projects.
And also.
That means you're aware of one of the regular company jokes, which is another word for willows is, of course, with these.
Why are they called with these?
Because with these we're going to make something.
Have I never used that?
No, you never heard.
I hear I gift you that rather sad joke.
I'll remember that.
Don't think you ever have to use it.
I mean, you know.
Sorry.
No, so I so it also combines my artwork when I'm doing, say, beach art.
I started that in 2010 with the residents I had on Coney Beach, which is sort of a it's probably not the most spiritual place you'd think of.
But I decided to take up the challenge of making Coney Beach, which is right by the fairground, right by Treco Bay, very, very public beach.
And there's a lot of litter that tends to be like a bit of donkey droppings and donkey droppings and everything in the summer.
And I decided to have a month to a month's residency there and visit the beach every single day, do a kind of beach clean and take personal responsibility for the environment,
taking care of the environment and creating a kind of spiritual connection, sacred connection with that space to see if I could change the energy of what was already there.
Not that there was anything wrong with the energy there, but I mean just that whole sort of environmental and just just being in nature.
Because usually I would go somewhere quite remote, such as Scare and make where I've got my own sort of stone circle and I go and it's very much conducive to some way you would more like liken to a sacred space.
Whereas Coney Beach is not in public view, so it's kind of for me it was a bit of a coming out of not.
What was the public reaction to finding you doing this?
Because there you were accessible, aren't you?
Yeah, yeah, well, that's the whole point is because is to be to be visible, picking up rubbish, inviting people to come along to pick up rubbish, but also to invite people to make artwork on the beach.
And you know, and then it wasn't obviously a spiritual act.
It was more because sort of the intention was there that that's what I was doing.
I was I was connecting with that environment to improve the environment and to connect with people that were there.
But in actual fact, the last day that I was there, it was on 31st of August.
There is a crowds come to see the firework display because it's seaside town.
And in fact, I started to make lanterns and that was the first time it would probably be maybe a little bit more spiritual in looking.
And there's big crowds of people came up that teenagers not not really anybody asked for 15, 16 year olds that were hanging around with nothing to do other than wait for the fireworks to happen.
And so they came around and they were kind of getting involved and and one person said, oh, my gosh, I can't believe we're on Coney Beach.
It's totally different. It's like being in another place.
So for me, it worked. It's transformative arts, isn't it?
Yes, it's the power of it, which brings us full circle, because that's certainly one of the ways in which I like to think of of carnival arts is it's that whole the world turned upside down.
Even if you know, yes, nine tenths of it is, as you pointed out, at the carnival camp.
But for one day in the year, you know, you've got you have the Lord of Mist rule gives his or her powers to us all to to transgress and to what can I say?
You know, well, just turn the normal everyday order upside down.
Absolutely. I think it does.
I think, you know, it's it's not about people being trained or people being professionals or people being having to be a certain type of person to be involved.
It does give everybody a chance.
It's one of the few art forms which I feel is genuinely accessible.
It is very inclusive.
And it even includes people who don't want to make the art.
I mean, it's like this year we were at Fitz Allen and then there were some boys who were brought there as part of family groups by their mums and they played football outside and then they perhaps come in and have a drink or whatever.
And that's fine, too.
There's no right or wrong with carnival.
I find it's not prescriptive, is it?
Nobody's going, you have to do the following.
No, there's only one road to follow.
And I think that transformative thing is very evident because you can have people that's coming in that are very shy, very introvert or very they don't want to be sent to attention, but they get caught up in the whole energy.
And as they see their friends or their groups transformed, then it sort of it brings them out of themselves and it puts them into a place where they can experiment and they can try something out that they wouldn't normally do.
Absolutely.
And I think the duration of the camp, because it lasts three weeks, people could come in and be quite sort of objective about it and stand back.
But I think by the time it finishes, you can't help but get involved and even if they thought they wouldn't, I think it just it really brings people out, which is a great sort of self empowering tool that happens quite naturally without forcing people to be creative or to be to be to be part of something.
So pleased that this interview took place.
I thank you for your eloquence.
And whilst it's invisible and it's yes, it's still eternal.
I hereby award you, Siobhan Grace, the title of Cardiff Carnival Queen.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Steve.